[Music]
the existence of black holes was
predicted over a century ago with
nothing but math equations now we've
taken the first photo of one but black
holes still hold plenty of secrets like
they're even more mysterious mirror
twins white holes really imagine if we
could record a black hole on video watch
it pull in and consume any matter that
gets too close even light itself
now take this recording and play it
backwards this is what a white hole
should be the black hole's
pushing away and matter spewing
counterpart we'll bring it back down to
earth go to your kitchen sink turn on
the faucet and see how water flows down
into the drain this drain is a black
hole
it's attraction is too powerful for a
stream of water to escape but now focus
on the stream itself where it meets the
surface of the sink it bursts in all
directions with such power that the
water can't flow back this is what a
white hole should be if you could blast
off into space in a rocket you'd meet
the biggest challenge the Earth's
gravity won't let you go except if your
engines are extremely powerful and
you're going fast enough to reach what's
called escape velocity the black hole's
gravity is so immense that escape
velocity becomes completely unreachable
it's higher than the speed of light and
nothing in the universe can go faster
than that take this force of gravity and
switch the direction now it pushes out
instead of pulling in just like it can't
escape a black hole's power light can't
get close to a white hole that's odd
because a white hole has mass so it
should have gravity like any space
object white hole should attract other
matter to them just like the Sun keeps
the planets floating around it or the
earth keeps your feet on the ground
a black hole has outer borders called
event horizons within them gravity is
the most powerful
if something goes beyond this limit it
won't ever escape a white hole's event
horizon would be an impenetrable border
not letting anything inside a black hole
is constantly feeding on the matter
around it huge clouds of gas and dust
that don't get pulled into the hole end
up swirling around it they form a
luminous accretion disk flattened like
that because it's spinning so fast
unlike black holes they're white twins
probably don't rotate so they wouldn't
have these halo like disks there's no
evidence that white holes as we imagine
them actually lurk somewhere in the
universe so far they're purely a
mathematical theory plus a massive
object constantly spewing matter would
have to be noticeable yet they're
nowhere to be found but there are
theories of what a white hole could be
remember learning in school matter
cannot be created or destroyed it means
the total amount of mass and energy in
the universe is constant for example
when you burn a log everything in the
end the soot ashes and gases will equal
the materials put into it and no matter
what happens to some particle it still
contains information about its original
state now this doesn't sit well with
black holes scientists know that all the
mass they have evaporates with time
because black holes leak energy but even
if a black hole lost all its mass it
still won't give back the information
about everything it consumed where does
all that material go we're used to
thinking that the source of a black hole
might be a singularity in its center
this is a single point so small yet so
massive and dense that physics and math
just break down it's almost like it
tears a hole in reality itself some
astronomers think that instead of a
singularity as a dense object in the
center there must be an opening deep
inside the black hole it might lead to
another point in the universe or to a
different universe entirely and what
could be on that other end is a white
hole this would solve the problem with
information it simply goes somewhere
else entirely instead of just
disappearing another idea
says that a Whitehall may be a brief
period of a black holes lifecycle it's
ending if black holes steadily lose
their mass they must eventually lose it
all and disappear but in this last stage
of their life they might become white
halls this would explain why we can't
detect them since it's almost impossible
to find an evaporated black hole their
evaporation simply takes too long
we know how black holes appear a star
much bigger than the Sun reaches an age
when its own gravity makes it collapse
in on itself in a supernova burst it's
much harder to understand how a white
hole would form unless it's also the
result of aging but of a black hole
instead of a star the first black holes
in the history of the universe formed
soon after the Big Bang happened and
those ancient things are great
candidates to bring about white holes
this idea also makes astronomers think
that white holes might be teeny-tiny
smaller than the wavelength of light and
those are the size of bacteria this
would make them invisible to us
nothing would react with them because of
their repelling force and still they'd
have a certain mass in other words
they'd be good candidates as the
mysterious dark matter
it makes up 85% of the universe yet we
can't observe it some say the Big Bang
itself is suspiciously similar to what a
white hole should be a tiny dot that
suddenly bursts out and spreads in all
directions producing all the matter that
will one day become stars galaxies
planets and life in 2006 a NASA
satellite caught an extremely powerful
gamma-ray burst those are the most
luminous energetic explosions known in
the universe but this one didn't come
from an area of space where such bursts
are expected his properties were also
unusual for both gamma-ray bursts coming
from supernova and neutron stars merging
while other bursts last just a few
seconds this one went on for a minute
and a half one of the ideas about its
origins
just that astronomers observed a real
white hole still the most probable
answer to the mystery of white holes is
that our calculations and predictions
about the nature of the universe aren't
precise enough in this case white holes
are just mathematical models that are
cool to play with and think about one
thing is certain some 50 years ago
black holes only existed on paper maybe
white holes will surprise us in the
future too